<MKL 05March2019>

Finalize the following edits with Lamit and Tom, then send to co-auths
and Rodolfo Dirzo (pre-edit).

<LJL 05March2019>

Hey Matt, attached are my comments on the paper. They are in little
comment boxes where relevant. Let me know if you need any
clarification. I think the paper is looking really cool, and that it
has a lot of potential to make a big impact.

A couple things:

1) Do you want to add in bark chemistry data? I have condensed tannin
data that I included in my 2011 lichen paper. It didn’t correlate with
X. Galericulata abundance but I never utilized it in the 2015 paper to
see if it had a relationship with the full community. I can easily
send you that data. I have it for just about every tree in the north
garden so it should overlap with your trees completely.  Also, bark pH
often correlated with Roughness (at least among tree species). Since
the effects of roughness on the network seemed to dissipate when
controlling for tree genotype, it seems that something else related to
genotype and correlated with roughness is driving the genotype network
effects. I have the dried bark sample that you collected a long time
ago and I should be able to measure pH in a day or two. Let me know if
you want me to do this.

2) The one thing that I think needs to pop more in the paper is the
novelty and importance of having replicated networks on each tree
genotype. As far as I know no one has done this before. All the
community genetics network and cooccurrence stuff you have done so far
has built single networks across the replicate trees of a genotype, so
the network for a genotype was not replicated and the inferences is
somewhat different. Here you made individual networks for each tree,
so you now have replication to measure heritability, and make direct
inference with statistical power about how genotype modulates network
structure. Somehow the importance of this needs to be made really
clear without degrading the importance of the past network papers. It
seems to me that bringing the network down to the level of genotype
makes a major contribution to the network literature by actually
linking the network to a scale that natural selection can act on; lots
of network stuff talks about evolution but it is always sampled at the
level of species and so makes major assumptions about the evolutionary
implications that it doesn’t every actually test. I think this point
could be made more strong in the 1st paragraph of the intro and then
reemphasized in more depth in the discussion. On the other side of
things, by sampling at the level of replicated genotypes, you most
fully bring the network perspective into the field of community
genetics, which likes to talk about communities of interacting species
being influenced by host genotype but rarely measures the interactions
(except in a limited set of trophic interaction papers). This point
could be more strongly emphasized in the 2nd paragraph of the Intro.
You provide a nice demonstration and a strong computational approach
to specifically going after interaction networks structure in a
community genetics context. So, the results fully bring together two
different fields and in doing so provides powerful novel reciprocal
insights.

3) With regards to feedback, I don’t think the lichens likely have any
impact on tree fitness. It would be nice if we could argue that they
might, but generally I suspect most lichenologists would argue that
they probably don’t affect the tree and are basically commensalists
benefitting from the tree as substrate while doing nothing good or bad
for the tree. However, although the statistical networks are built
just with lichens, the individual trees that host them are part of the
network in the larger sense (like a central hub that everything in the
network interactions with). Its like the tree is the foundation
species within its individual tree-lichen network, and changes in
genetics among trees cause shifts in the network structure. This is
awesome because it suggest that if any sort of natural selection
favors some tree genotypes over other (for reasons that are not
directly related to the actions of lichens themselves), some lichen
interaction network structures may be favored over others. By being
sensitive to tree genotype, the lichen community networks are like
passive riders on the waves of evolutionary dynamics that occur within
the tree species they inhabit. We show this with lichens but the
potential is that this could happen for networks of all sorts of
organisms that form around foundation species.

4) I would emphasize heritability in the Results more and deemphasize
the R2, since I think the heritability has more statistical
validity. It would be useful to put Supplemental table 1 in the main
text.

5) It wasn’t clear to me if the interactions are positive or negative
or if the direction is not really quantified in your methods. Could
you speak to that more in the paper? Could we quantify positive vs
negative interactions?


The National Academy of Sciences is such an odd thing to me. There are
several people who really seem like they should be part of it but
somehow aren’t. It seems to also have a bias towards people at
prestigious places despite the fact that fantastic groundbreaking work
is often done at the public schools of “lesser” status. I think that
we should at minimum get John N Thompson to give us a friendly review
before we submit, or perhaps more useful, is to suggest him as a
reviewer when we submit since we know he is into this type of stuff
and would likely give a favorable review. In addition to Rudolfo, what
about Hal Mooney? Tom, for some reason I recall maybe you had some
contact with him. Or, maybe I figment that right out of my
imagination.


Best
Jamie

<TGW 05March2019>

Hi Matt and Jamie, Sorry for the delay in going over the manuscript.
We just finished a marathon of grant writing on 3 proposals that has
been very time consuming.  As you know I like this paper a lot and
feel it should go in a high profile journal.  Rodolfo Dirzo might be
considered as a National Academy of Sciences member who might consider
conveying this for us.  John N. Thompson is, as far as I can
determine, not a member.  Matt, what about the Thompson at Harvard
Forest?
 
I think the science comes across well (except for the results
paragraphs that are long lists of statistical findings) and so for me
the major issue that I think we are weak on is, what does it all mean
and why is it so important?  I really think we need to focus on this
in the abstract, merit box, intro and discussion sections.  In my
opinion, showing that interaction networks are genetically based
clearly raises the potential for them to subject to natural selection
and to be evolved traits of plants that are heritable.  I think a
major issue in this case with lichens is whether or not lichens can
feed back to affect plant performance or whether they are responding
to bark traits that have evolved for other reasons, and the lichen
responses are passive.  I don’t know if there is a literature on
lichens influencing their host plants in some way, but I think we need
to cover this.  The fact that lichens are limited and defined in part
by a genetics-based functional plant trait argues that selection on
that trait can influence lichen interaction networks and the evolution
of lichen communities.  I think it is crucial for a high profile
journal to raise such issues and discuss their implications. I feel
that many readers will be surprised that plant genetics could have
such an effect on an epiphyte community and will find this very
interesting, so we need to explore it specifically and its broader
implications with or without feedbacks.  I will be out of town for two
weeks beginning March 13 and am happy to go back and forth on these
implications as needed.  Thanks for all your hard work on this; I
think it is getting close.  I’ve also attached a recent paper of ours
with Kitty as the lead author that came out on PNAS.  In this paper
the methods go after the discussion and not before the results as you
have done.  It might be a good model for the formatting of our paper.
Hope this helps and I look forward to hearing from you.  Please
confirm receipt as the file size might get rejected by our server.

Cheers, Tom
